U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Land Management 
Protecting Taxpayers and Communities 
from Orphaned Oil and Gas Wells on 
Public Lands 
The Bureau of Land Management’s (BLM’s) recently updated oil and gas leasing regulations 
increased bonding amounts for oil and gas wells for the first time in more than 50 years, an 
important change to ensure taxpayers do not end up footing the bill to plug and reclaim wells 
on public lands. There are currently thousands of oil and gas wells on Federal land that are not 
producing energy and can pose health and safety risks to communities and wildlife and financial 
risks to the American taxpayer. 
The BLM is responsible for ensuring that these wells are reclaimed and takes steps to reduce the potential 
liability they pose to communities, wildlife, and taxpayers by addressing all stages of a well once it has 
stopped producing: shut-in wells, temporarily abandoned wells, idled wells, and orphaned wells. Once wells 
are no longer in production, they can pose risks to local communities and the environment from leaks and 
emissions, as well as a risk to taxpayers who can bear the ultimate costs of reclamation. There are about 
8,500 wells classified as idled on BLM-managed Federal lands, meaning they have not been in production for 
4 years. The BLM oversaw plugging of more than 1,500 wells in 2023. 
It can take many years for a well to be formally classified as “orphaned” and thousands of idled wells, as 
well as the many more shut-in and temporarily abandoned wells, require vigilance and intervention. Both the 
Government Accountability Office (in a 2011 report) and the Office of Inspector General (in a 2018 report) 
have found that thousands of idled wells pose a risk of becoming orphaned and recommended that the BLM 
address these potential liabilities. 
The following is an explanation of the various stages of wells that are no longer in production. 
Temporarily Abandoned and Shut-In Wells 
• Shut-in wells are defined in the BLM’s recently 
updated oil and gas regulations as nonoperational 
wells that can physically and mechanically operate 
by opening valves or activating existing equipment. 
Operators must provide notice if a well is shut-in for 
90 or more consecutive days. 
• Temporarily abandoned wells are defined in the 
BLM’s recently updated oil and gas regulations 
as nonoperational wells that are not physically or 
mechanically capable of production or injection 
without additional equipment or without servicing 
the well, but that may have future beneficial use. 
Operators must receive prior approval for any well 
temporarily abandoned for more than 30 days and 
for any delays in permanently abandoning the well 
for more than 1 year. 
• Both shut-in and temporarily abandoned wells are 
generally expected to be permanently abandoned if 
they do not resume production within 4 years and 
are subject to mechanical integrity tests after 
3 years to reduce risks to other natural resources 
and communities. 
• The BLM will review notifications to confirm the 
appropriate status of these wells. 
• Shut-in and temporarily abandoned wells may 
become idled wells.
Idled Wells 
• Idled wells are defined by Section 40601 of the 
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (commonly 
referred to as the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL)) 
as a well that has been nonoperational for not fewer 
than 4 years and for which there is no anticipated 
beneficial future use. 
• Section 40601 of BIL requires the Secretary of the 
Interior, through the BLM Director, to periodically 
review all idled wells on Federal land and reduce the 
inventory of idled wells on Federal land. 
• Federal lands for the interpretation of BIL are lands 
with a Federal interest in either the surface estate, 
mineral estate, or both. The BLM manages oil and 
gas wells in Federal mineral estate. Other Federal 
agencies manage wells that are on Federal surface 
estate but non-Federal mineral estate. 
• Section 40601 of BIL modified the Energy Policy 
Act of 2005 by reducing the time period for idled 
wells from 7 years nonoperational to 4 years 
nonoperational. 
• As of May 19, 2024, there are approximately 9,781 
idled wells (8,508 Federal and 1,273 Tribal land). 
• The BLM is actively managing idled wells. During 
the first two quarters of FY 2024, about 670 wells 
were removed from the idled well list as they were 
either plugged (approximately 420) or returned to 
production. During that same period, 604 wells 
were added to the list as those wells became 
nonoperational for 4 years. 
• Instruction Memorandum 2020-006, “Idled Well 
Reviews and Data Entry, ” describes the BLM’s current 
policy on managing idled wells with the exception 
that 7 years is replaced with 4 years in the document. 
• The Government Accountability Office (GAO) and the 
Office of Inspector General have found that thousands 
of idled wells are at risk of becoming orphaned. The 
GAO’s finding that the vast majority of bonds that it 
reviewed were insufficient to reclaim wells led in part 
to the BLM’s recent increase in bonding amounts 
through the oil and gas leasing rule. 
Orphaned Wells 
• Orphaned wells on Federal Lands are defined by 
Section 40601 of BIL as a well that is not used for an 
authorized purpose, such as production, injection, 
or monitoring; and for which no operator can be 
located; [or] the operator of which is unable to plug 
the well; and to remediate and reclaim the well site; 
or that is located within the National Petroleum 
Reserve–Alaska. 
• Section 40601 of BIL provides up to $250 million to 
plug and reclaim Federal orphaned wells. 
• The BLM holds parties responsible for plugging and 
reclaiming wells from the time the well is drilled until 
the well is plugged and the lands reclaimed. When an 
entity transfers their lease rights, they remain liable 
for plugging and reclaiming wells that existed at the 
time of the transfer. 
• Entities that fail to plug and reclaim their wells are 
placed on the list of entities in noncompliance and 
are prohibited from obtaining new leases or rights in 
existing leases until they have fulfilled their obligations 
and are removed from the noncompliance list. 
• Instruction Memorandum 2021-039, “Orphaned 
Well Identification, Prioritization, and Plugging and 
Reclamation, ” describes the BLM’s process for 
pursuing responsible parties and determining when a 
well becomes orphaned in Federal minerals. 
Reclamation Bonds 
• As a final safeguard, in the recent updates to the 
oil and gas regulations, the BLM has increased 
minimum bonding rates to ensure that if the BLM 
must rely on a bond to reclaim wells, the funds are 
more likely to be adequate. 
• For an individual lease, the minimum bond amount is 
$150,000. 
• For a statewide bond, the minimum bond amount is 
$500,000. 
• Instruction Memorandum 2024-014, “Oil and Gas 
Bonds Adequacy Reviews, ” describes the BLM’s 
process for evaluating adequacy of bonds and 
adjusting them to address higher risks. 
June 2024