Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
DISCLAIMER
 
This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States 
Government. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, 
makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, 
completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that 
its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, 
process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessarily constitute 
or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or any agency 
thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do no necessarily state or reflect those of the 
United States Government or any agency thereof.
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
ABSTRACT
This study was performed as part of Cooperative Agree-
ment DE-FC26-06NT15567 with the Department of Energy 
National Energy Technology Laboratory. Research was 
undertaken as part of a larger effort to assist state govern-
ments in the effective, efficient and environmentally sound 
regulation of the exploration and production of natural gas 
and crude oil. Specific projects in the agreement include 
evaluating the scope of the country’s orphan oil and natural 
gas wells and proposing solutions for permanently sealing 
these wells, evaluating the impact of new technologies on 
environmental protection, and assessing technology issues 
associated with wells nearing the end of productive life. 
Protecting Our Country’s Resources: The States’ Case is the 
culmination of an in-depth study of the country’s orphan oil 
and natural gas wells.
The Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission 
(IOGCC) has been studying orphan wells as an ancillary 
segment of reports it compiled in 1992, 1996 and 2000. 
These reports documented the potential presence and es-
timated numbers of orphan wells in the United States, the 
plugging costs associated with them, sources of “plugging 
funds” for individual states, and individual state statutes and 
regulations associated with orphan wells.
Technology improvements, such as GIS tracking and 
computerized record-keeping, and introduction of innova-
tive methods for locating orphan wells have allowed states to 
address identifying and plugging wells that were abandoned 
years, and even decades ago, by unidentified parties.
Most states define an orphan well as being inactive and 
having no responsible party to properly plug the well and 
restore the location. Well owners might have ceased to exist 
as a business entity or might never have been known. For 
purposes of this report an orphan well is described as a well 
that is not producing or injecting, has not received state ap-
proval to remain idle, and for which the operator is unknown 
or insolvent.
Site restoration, which involves the removal of equip-
ment, trash and debris, the repair of erosion, and removal of 
hydrocarbons and closing pits, can prevent potential safety 
hazards and allow landowners and citizens to employ the 
impacted area for other uses. In some cases, there is potential 
for groundwater contamination and wells must be “plugged” 
to reduce environmental risks.
The responsibility for monitoring restoring well sites, 
and plugging orphan wells falls inevitably to individual 
states. Most oil and gas producing states have established 
plugging funds derived from taxes on production, fees or 
other assessments to plug orphan wells. When funds fall 
short of the need, most states stretch their money by priori-
tizing wells that pose environmental hazards. Other major 
issues involving orphan wells are identifying them and 
subsequently monitoring their condition.
The current study is a continuation of the collection of 
data associated with orphan wells since 1992 and includes 
questions intended to provide a more comprehensive view of 
the situation. Prior years’ data were analyzed and reviewed 
to identify trends, commonalities, and regional differences 
among the states. Plugging funds, changes and trends are 
also analyzed to give a more accurate picture of the efforts 
of the states to address the wells and current orphan well 
numbers. In addition, anecdotal reports of unique regional 
issues and innovative solutions are included in the report.
Data were collected by surveying the state regulatory 
personnel and by obtaining input from industry representa-
tives. State oil and gas agencies were issued a survey via 
e-mail. The number of actual and possible orphan wells was 
compiled initially in March 2007 by telephone. The states 
were then surveyed in May and any contradicting data were 
resolved. Additionally, state agency representatives were 
personally interviewed on a one-on-one basis for more infor-
mation and data confirmation.
There are approximately 50,000 wells awaiting site 
restoration or plugging. Remediating all sites would be an 
extremely large burden. Many of these wells have been pri-
oritized according to the threat they pose to the environment. 
In fact, the majority of orphan wells pose little or no threat to 
the environment. Others, however, should be plugged in pro-
active programs to prevent potential environmental impacts.
In general, states should be commended for their efforts, 
both in finding and remediating orphan wells. The states also 
have set up regulatory structures that require adequate bond-
ing or insurance coverage to prevent the likelihood of the 
unfunded liability of orphan wells in the future.
It must, however, be noted that while states have estab-
lished plugging funds, those funds are insufficient to address 
timely cleanup of the remaining orphan wells. Therefore, it’s 
essential to establish innovative programs to plug existing 
orphan wells. 
i
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ..........................................................................................................................i
PREFACE ............................................................................................................................2
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...................................................................................................3
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................4
LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY ..........................................................................................5
METHODOLOGY ................................................................................................................5
STUDY RESULTS ...............................................................................................................6
Orphan Wells ..................................................................................................................6
Plugging Funds ..............................................................................................................8
Security or Financial Assurance ..............................................................................12
Efforts to Find & Plug ................................................................................................14
Pennsylvania: A Case Study ..................................................................................14
California: Adopt-a-well ..........................................................................................14
Oklahoma: Voluntary Assessment ........................................................................14
Texas: Production Tax incentives ........................................................................14
Michigan: industry support ...................................................................................15
CANADIAN PROVINCES .................................................................................................15
RECOMMENDATIONS ....................................................................................................16
DATA TABLES ..................................................................................................................17
APPENDICES ...................................................................................................................27
STATE SUMMARIES .......................................................................................................27
State summary introduction .....................................................................................27
GRAPHICAL MATERIALS LIST ......................................................................................62
REFERENCES ..................................................................................................................62
BIBLIOGRAPHY ...............................................................................................................62
LIST OF ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS ..............................................................62
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
PREFACE
Since man discovered fire, humans around the globe 
continuously have sought better ways to generate power, 
heat and light. The use of petroleum resources actually 
occurred relatively early. Seep oil, oil naturally rising to 
the surface in a river or pond, or through a mine, has been 
collected since the Middle Ages. One method involved 
damming rivers and creeks with oil seeps located nearby to 
create a pond where oil could be skimmed from the surface. 
And, oil has been produced from wells as early as A.D. 347 
in China, using bits attached to bamboo poles, which were 
then pounded into the ground.
It was not until the late 1800s that the value of oil 
and natural gas as a universal energy source became clear. 
California may have been one of the first states to harness 
the “waste” (natural gas and oil byproducts) of water or 
brine wells to light the Stockton Courthouse. Today, oil 
and natural gas account for more than 60 percent of energy 
consumed in the United States. The United States imports a 
majority, some estimate more than 58 percent, of its oil and 
around 16 percent of its natural gas supplies. As countries 
like China develop and world demand grows for petroleum 
resources, not only will the nation’s domestic petroleum 
industry become more important, but the stewardship of 
existing and potential reserves will also grow in significance. 
Those, and the many compelling reasons to correctly 
manage our environment, form the basis of the long standing 
concern with, and study of, the nation’s orphan wells.
As the recognized authority on this subject, the 
IOGCC presents this report as a compelling call to action 
to industry, state governments and agencies and to the 
federal government. States call on industry to provide 
responsibly for the plugging and remediation of all current 
wells and to expand and continue the partnership to address 
orphan wells. The IOGCC also calls on state government 
to assess and address regulatory requirements to assure 
that wells are initiated and managed in an economically 
and environmentally responsible manner. The IOGCC also 
calls on the federal government to follow the states’ lead in 
identifying and plugging orphan wells located on federal 
properties and to release funding as provided in the Energy 
Policy Act of 2005.
The IOGCC thanks the states and their representatives 
for their diligent assistance in compiling the data for this 
report and for their continued efforts to find and remediate 
problem orphan wells.
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission 
(IOGCC) has been studying orphan wells and the costs and 
regulations associated with managing these wells since 1992. 
Orphan wells, defined here as abandoned oil and natural gas 
wells that have no identified or solvent owner, have been 
a part of the oil and natural gas industry’s landscape since 
the beginning. One of the fundamental issues with orphan 
wells is that data concerning their existence is, by definition, 
inexact. Data collection in the early years was incomplete at 
best and many owners and operators were lost in the course 
of history as the industry cycled through boom and bust. Post-
regulation, bust cycles have continued to contribute to the 
number of orphan wells, but not in such daunting numbers.
The first drilling for oil and gas in the United States 
occurred during the early to mid-1800s. In many states, 
only a few wells were drilled (many of these dry holes) in 
the very earliest years, as wildcatters searched widely for 
oil and gas resources. In states where exploration activities 
were successful, however, a fairly large number of wells 
were drilled and produced prior to the enactment of state 
regulations. Since many of these wells were drilled between 
1860 and 1930, the exact number is uncertain. On average, 
60 years elapsed between the drilling of the first exploratory 
well and the establishment of a formal regulatory system. 
This resulted in the majority of the orphan wells today. In our 
1999 survey, member states reported estimates of the number 
of pre-regulatory wells drilled in their states that indicated a 
potential on the low side of just over 828,000 to a high side 
estimate of 1.06 million wells nationally.
Currently, there are around 60,000 orphan wells on 
plugging lists, a figure that appears not to have shifted greatly 
despite the states’ prodigious efforts at plugging orphan wells. 
This is due largely to the more aggressive approach states are 
taking to find the wells. States estimate that potentially more 
than 90,000 orphan wells exist but remain undocumented at 
this time. Meanwhile, states are moving to plug the known 
orphan wells. Some older producing areas are addressing 
the problem with significant increases in their state plugging 
funds. Other states have taken the initiative to ensure that the 
wells posing the greatest environmental threats are plugged 
first. New York has changed its prioritization to mirror the 
IOGCC’s environmental scoring system for abandoned wells. 
Similarly, California has adjusted its processes so an “acute 
orphan well” has priority for plugging. States reporting that 
their prioritization schemes for plugging wells have not 
changed since the last report in 2000 are Alabama, Colorado, 
Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Nebraska, New Mexico, 
Oklahoma, Utah, West Virginia and Wyoming. Other states, 
where production occurred later, benefit from the protection 
of state laws and regulations at the start of their oil and natural 
gas history. 
“Thankfully, our oil and gas regulations were in place 
early enough that orphan wells are not a significant problem in 
Nebraska,” said William H. Sydow, director of the Nebraska 
Oil & Gas Conservation Commission. “At the present time, 
our agency secures funds through the budget/appropriation 
process and uses our commission’s cash fund to plug and 
abandon any orphaned wells.”
As part of a cooperative agreement with the Department 
of Energy, IOGCC has been tasked with evaluating the scope 
of the country’s orphan oil and natural gas well situation and 
the efforts to manage these wells. This report is a culmination 
of our most current study of the nation’s orphan wells and 
how states address problems associated with these wells. 
What is clear is that most states have increased their efforts 
and their expenditures since our first study in 1992 and are 
earnestly engaged in identifying and remediating orphan 
wells. Additionally, over the course of this period, states 
have made significant headway in acquiring and managing 
orphan well data. Still the total scope of the problem remains 
somewhat ambiguous.
Over the years, states have been the leaders in 
implementing innovative programs related to orphan well 
management. For example, agencies have allowed the sale of 
orphan wells to operators who believe a return to productive 
status is a possibility. Other states have considered tax credits 
for operators who voluntarily plug orphan wells in the vicinity 
of their active operations. 
IOGCC member states trust that some day a report on 
orphan wells will be unnecessary. Their ultimate goal is to 
find and plug every orphan well, while taking the necessary 
precautions to prevent future orphan wells. The IOGCC 
expresses its appreciation to the participating states and 
agencies, not only for providing the data that form the core 
of this report, but also for their creative efforts to find the 
nation’s orphan wells and adequately plug them.
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
INTRODUCTION
The Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission 
(IOGCC) has been studying orphan wells as an ancillary 
segment of reports it compiled in 1992, 1996 and 2000. These 
reports documented the potential presence and estimated 
numbers of orphan wells in the United States, the plugging 
costs associated with them, sources of “plugging funds” for 
individual states, and individual state statutes and regulations 
associated with orphan wells. 
The advent of technology improvements, such as GIS 
tracking and computerized recordkeeping, and introduction 
of innovative methods for locating orphan wells has allowed 
states to begin to fully address identifying and plugging 
wells that were abandoned years, and even decades ago, by 
unidentified parties. As part of a grant with the Department 
of Energy, IOGCC has undertaken the task of conducting a 
more in-depth evaluation of the scope of the country’s orphan 
oil and natural gas wells and identifying potential solutions to 
permanently sealing these wells. 
Most states define an orphan well as being inactive and 
having no responsible party to properly plug the well and 
restore the location. Well owners might have ceased to exist 
as a business entity or might never have been known. Some 
states, such as West Virginia and Indiana, have yet to statutorily 
define an orphan well. Kentucky and Wyoming define orphan 
wells as having no bonding. Although terminology used by 
individual states varies, for the purposes of this report, an 
orphan well is defined as:
A well that is not producing or injecting, has 
not received state approval to remain idle, 
and for which the operator is unknown or 
insolvent. 
The causes of orphan wells are varied. Historically, 
factors that contribute to the development of orphan wells 
are a combination of technological capabilities of the era and 
the economic climate. During the earliest years of petroleum 
production, wells were literally abandoned. The wooden 
superstructure might have been salvaged for other uses and 
as metal replaced wood, the casings and superstructure were 
sometimes pulled for use in other wells or for salvage value, 
particularly during the two World Wars when steel was in 
short supply. The well hole itself was left either unplugged 
or plugged with tree stumps, logs, mud, or a variety of other 
readily available materials. Generally, wells drilled prior to 
the 1930s were shallow and lacked a cement plug. California 
was the first state to make plugging with cement mandatory, 
but by then, the state estimates nearly 30,000 wells had been 
drilled. As drilling technology and state oversight improved, 
wells were going deeper and plugging procedures were 
established. Still, many wells pre-dating 1952 were probably 
plugged improperly. Early cement plugs were not always 
effective as their compounds lacked the chemical components 
to withstand down-hole temperatures and pressure, so failing 
to harden properly. This led to the establishment of industry 
standards in 1952. Recurrent bust cycles have contributed to 
the orphan well inventory.
The responsibility for monitoring and plugging orphan 
wells falls inevitably to individual states. Most oil and gas 
producing states have established plugging funds derived 
from taxes on production, fees or other assessments to plug 
orphan wells. The earliest funds were established in the 1960s 
and the latest in the 1990s. The average cost to properly drill 
out and plug an orphan well varies widely depending on 
well depth and condition, terrain and other variable factors. 
It covers a range from $2,000 to $40,000, with most states 
reporting an average cost between $6,000 to $12,000. When 
funds fall short of the need, most states stretch their money 
by prioritizing wells that pose environmental hazards. The 
current survey revealed 11 producing states had more than 
1,000 wells approved for plugging on lists waiting for state 
funds. Illinois, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Missouri, New 
York, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Texas and West Virginia 
all reported waiting lists numbering in the thousands, with 
Kentucky and Texas reporting the most at 10,600 and 11,220 
wells on the waiting list respectively. In some respects, this 
is a measure of the states’ prodigious work in identifying and 
documenting orphan wells and as such is a testimony to their 
diligence. In other respects, it begins to reveal the size and 
significance of the burden many states face.
“Since the start of the current Texas program in 1991, the 
Texas Railroad Commission has plugged more than 41,000 
wells at a total cost of approximately $80 million,” said 
Texas Railroad Commissioner, Victor Carrillo. Although we 
consider our program a huge success, our current orphan well 
count still exceeds 11,000 wells. Minimizing, and ultimately 
eliminating, this orphan well count is a priority for me. 
Plugging orphan wells is an important environmental goal 
because it eliminates the potential damage that old, abandoned 
wells can pose to underground fresh water sources.” Other 
major issues involving orphan wells are identifying them 
and subsequently monitoring their condition. Location and
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
other data pertaining to wells drilled in the first 20 years 
of petroleum exploration are incomplete at best. Likewise, 
data concerning wells abandoned by companies that have 
long vanished also are incomplete. Such wells are often 
barely visible and are in remote areas where they have gone 
undetected for decades. Orphan wells can pose both physical 
and environmental hazards, because hydrocarbons, salts, and 
ground water migrate. An unplugged well creates a conduit 
allowing these materials to mingle, either contaminating 
underground aquifers and water wells, or seeping to the surface 
to contaminate fields, waterways, or ponds. Similarly, water 
and salts can migrate into and contaminate petroleum reserves 
through abandoned and improperly plugged orphan wells. 
Beyond the contamination, surface seeps can accelerate the 
risk and ferocity of wild fires. As unplugged wells deteriorate 
over time, they can cave in on themselves or give way to 
unsuspecting animals and humans. 
The current study is a continuation of the collection of 
data associated with orphan wells since 1992 and included 
questions intended to provide a more comprehensive view of 
the situation. Prior years’ data were analyzed and reviewed 
to identify trends, commonalities, and regional differences 
amongst the states.
Plugging funds, changes and trends are also analyzed, 
in order to give a more accurate picture of the efforts of the 
states to address the wells and current orphan well numbers. 
In addition, anecdotal reports of unique regional issues and 
innovative solutions are included in the report.
The report includes sections covering: 
	 n Limitations of the study
 n Methodology 
 n Study results
• Orphan well statistics: individual and 
collective
• Plugging funds 
• Security or financial assurance
• Salvage value of orphan wells
 n Efforts to find and plug orphan wells 
 n Statutory summary
 n Recommendations 
 n Appendices
• Domestic orphan wells at-a-glance
• In-depth state-by-state descriptions
n Statutory authority and definitions 
n Unique definitions of orphan wells
n Security or financial assurance 
n Regional and anecdotal 
information 
LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY
Data on orphan wells were collected from IOGCC 
member states and international affiliates. Thirty-four of 
IOGCC’s member states participated in the study, of whom 
eight reported no plugging activity for the period 2000 to 
2006. Another 10 reported plugging activity in the hundreds, 
nine reported in the thousands. Again, for purposes of this 
study, an orphan well is defined as a well that is not producing 
or injecting, has not received state approval to remain idle, and 
for which the operator is unknown or is not solvent. At this 
point, there are no standardized data collection requirements 
for the classification of orphan wells. Each of the oil and 
natural gas producing regions of the United States has unique 
variables to contend with such as geologic formations, local 
and state regulations and regulatory structure, and data 
collection methodologies. 
Among the data collected were the number of orphan 
wells plugged, the number of orphan wells on each state’s 
plugging list, and the estimated number of unidentified and/or 
undocumented orphan wells that could potentially exist. This 
estimated number was gathered in hopes of anticipating the 
potential long-term costs to plug wells that have not yet been 
found. Bonding information has been compiled to demonstrate 
how the states are taking preventive measures to deal with 
abandoned and idle wells on-going, to keep wells drilled today 
from becoming the liability of state taxpayers in the future. 
Plugging regulations and prioritization schemes have been 
collected so the states can view the wide range of alternatives. 
As well, information on average cost to plug and the funds 
and funding sources was compiled. Statutory definitions and 
authority specific to orphan wells and preventing them also 
have been compiled.   
METHODOLOGY
Data were collected by surveying the state regulatory 
personnel and with input from industry representatives. State 
oil and gas agencies were issued a survey via e-mail. The 
number of actual and possible orphan wells was compiled 
initially in March 2007 by telephone. The states were then 
surveyed in May and any contradicting data were resolved. 
Additionally, state agency representatives were personally 
interviewed on a one-on-one basis for additional information 
and data confirmation.
The study questionnaire requested information on a range 
of topics to provide insights into state programs addressing 
orphan wells. The information obtained from the states falls 
within the following categories:
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
Orphan well data.  States were asked to provide the 
number of wells plugged, the amount of plugging funds 
expended, and an estimate of the number of unidentified and / 
or undocumented orphan wells in their state.
Plugging funds. Many states have established plugging 
funds to ensure that wells are properly plugged and abandoned. 
Several states have increased the amounts of these funds in 
recent years. 
Security or financial assurance.  Most states require 
some form of security or financial assurance. The methods 
and amounts vary, but financial assurance is required on most 
wells to ensure proper plugging and abandonment - even in 
the case of operator insolvency. 
Salvage value of orphan wells. Most states can salvage 
lease equipment or hydrocarbons left in storage tanks and use 
the salvage value to offset the cost of state-funded plugging. 
Efforts to find and plug orphan wells.  Several states 
have developed programs to help find and plug orphan wells. 
They range from volunteer groups searching for orphan wells 
to states offering tax incentives to landowners willing to adopt 
an orphan well.
Statutory authority . Authority dealing with orphan 
wells.
Anecdotal information.  Many states have unique 
regional and/or regulatory environments that provide more 
insight into the orphan well situation and may provide a basis 
for further study.
Additionally, prior years’ survey data were consolidated and 
analyzed beginning with the initial survey year of 1992 serving 
as the base year. Inconsistencies were identified, adjusted and 
verified with the reporting state agency on a case-by-case 
basis. This is intended to provide a comprehensive view of 
orphan well status and trends since the inception of research.
DISCLAIMER
Although many efforts were made to test the accuracy 
and consistency of the data, conflicts remain as a result of 
several inherent areas. States differ as to fiscal years and 
data collection in the states may adhere to fiscal year time 
frames or may follow calendar years. Some states have broad 
responsibilities for plugging a variety of wells (orphan, 
insolvent but known operator, etc.) while others address only 
orphan oil and natural gas wells as defined in this study. Some 
states use plugging funds for site remediation, while others 
have separate funds. Some states consider site remediation 
costs as part of the cost to plug and others do not. Some states 
reported data in our earliest reports that cannot be supported 
currently. While the states and their staffs have gone far above 
and beyond the call to assist us in every way to bring the basis 
of this data into conformity, there is still the chance that some 
data presented in this report may contain flaws. However, 
we believe that such flaws, if they exist, are not materially 
significant to the purpose of this report, which is principally to 
establish the existence and direction of states’ efforts toward 
addressing orphan wells.
STUDY RESULTS
ORPhAn WELLS
Orphan Well Plugging Wait List. Surveyed states report-
ed 59,222 wells on plugging or site remediation waiting lists 
in 2006. Since the initial study in 1992, states have reported 
steady increases to the number of wells on their wait lists, 
despite marked increases in the number of wells plugged and 
funds expended each survey period. States continue to locate 
formerly undocumented wells for a variety of reasons such 
as the advent of technology improvements like GIS tracking 
and satellite photography, computerized record-keeping, and 
the introduction of innovative methods for locating wells.
With 11,220 orphan wells on its plugging list, Texas 
reports having the most identified orphan wells waiting to be 
plugged, with Kentucky not far behind with 10,600. Penn-
sylvania and Kansas report 8,700 and 7,271 wells on waiting 
lists, respectively. The next cluster of significant numbers 
is reported by New York at 4,800, Illinois at 3,900, Louisi-
ana at 3,183, Oklahoma and Ohio at 2,089 and Missouri at 
2,000.
The number of wells waiting to be plugged in individual 
states at any given time may depend on a variety of fac-
tors, such as the number of oil and gas wells within the state 
regulatory program, the adequacy of security or financial as-
surance provided by oil and gas operators, the availability of 
state plugging funds and staff resources, and state procure-
ment procedures. Legal issues arising from insolvency also 
can delay plugging by either operators or the state.
Undocumented / Unidentified Orphan Wells. In 1996, the 
states were asked to provide a high to low estimated range of 
the number of undocumented or unidentified orphan wells. 
This year, surveyed states were asked to estimate the number 
of undocumented or unidentified orphan wells not on their 
plugging wait lists. Surveyed states used a variety of methods 
to estimate the amount of undocumented or unidentified wells 
in their regions, from an estimate based upon historical figures, 
to a calculation of a percentage of wells on their current lists.
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
Figure 1. Total estimated orphan wells: all surveyed states (2006)
State Wait list Undocumented Total Orphan Wells
Alabama 0 3 3
Alaska 15 0 15
Arkansas 577 1,200 1,777
California 430 967 1,397
Colorado 45 45 90
Florida 17 150 167
Illinois 3,900 0 3,900
Indiana 598 1,300 1,898
Kansas 7,271 10,729 18,000
Kentucky 10,600 2,500 13,100
Louisiana 3,183 625 3,808
Michigan 100 15 115
Mississippi 49 0 49
Missouri 2,000 0 2,000
Montana 90 475 565
Nebraska 6 6 12
New Mexico 134 0 134
New York 4,800 40,000 44,800
North Dakota 4 0 4
Ohio 2,089 9,000 11,089
Oklahoma 2,089 10,000 12,089
Pennsylvania 8,700 0 8,700
Tennessee   
Texas 11,220 0 11,220
Utah 8 59 67
Virginia 37 70 107
West Virginia 1,260 13,000 14,260
Wyoming 0 5 5
Grand Totals 59,222 90,149 149,371
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
Figure 2. Total Estimated Orphan Wells
Figure 2 shows the total estimated orphan wells for all surveyed states. Prior studies reported 
only the number of wells on waiting lists (line). 2006 survey respondents were asked to estimate 
the number of undocumented and/or unidentified wells (square), which, when added to wait list 
figures provides an estimate of the total number of orphan wells in the nation (triangle).
The range of undocumented and/or unidentified wells 
is wide. Some states declined to provide an estimate, while 
others used a formula based on the number of undocumented 
wells that are discovered on average in a year and projecting 
forward. Six of the surveyed states, Alaska, Illinois, Missouri, 
North Dakota, Texas and Pennsylvania did not provide an 
estimate of undocumented wells. Historically, Alaska, New 
Mexico and North Dakota have a smaller amount of wells 
on their wait lists as compared to other states. The states 
which, in this survey, estimated the highest potential number 
of undocumented wells include New York with an estimate 
of 40,000, West Virginia with 13,000, Kansas with 10,729 
and Oklahoma with 10,000. In all cases, these estimates were 
lower than the original low to high estimate range that states 
provided in 1999, which is likely indicative of the progress 
these states are making. Arguably, any estimate is a fluid 
number and is not, in itself, important. Rather this estimate 
is significant as an indicator of the potential cost to plug and 
remediate to which the states may be exposed.
As unplugged orphan wells are identified, they are 
generally included on waiting lists or databases established 
by the states and prioritized for plugging and abandonment. 
States prioritize among wells to be plugged, focusing on those 
that pose the greatest potential harm. It should be noted that 
states plug wells other than orphan wells and these wells 
affect the waiting list.  Also, some orphan wells may later be 
adopted by an operator and returned to production or other 
use. 
PLuGGInG FunDS
Most states have established plugging funds that vary 
widely, both in scope and funding mechanisms, to ensure that 
wells for which no or insufficient financial assurance exists 
are properly plugged and abandoned. As orphan wells are 
identified, they are included on waiting lists established by 
the states and prioritized for plugging. The number of wells 
on each state’s waiting list may be different from the number 
of orphan wells because: states plug wells other than orphan 
	 1992	 1996	 1999	 2006
160,000
140,000
120,000
100,000
80,000
60,000
40,0000
20,000
0
–•–	Plugging	wait	lists
n	 Estimate	undocu-
mented	orphan
	 wells
▲   Total	orphan	wells
	 (estimated)
Total	Estimated	Orphan	Wells
All	surveyed	states
Survey	Year
n
▲
•
• •
•
#	of	Wells
▲ ▲ ▲n n n
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
wells; some orphan wells may later be adopted by an operator 
and returned to production or other use; or because states 
prioritize among wells to be plugged, focusing on those that 
pose the greatest potential harm. 
The plugging of orphan wells by state regulatory agencies 
remains a significant issue. While most states have increased 
the amounts in their plugging funds in the last six years, 
some states have maintained the same amount. New Mexico 
established an Oil and Gas Reclamation Fund in 1977. Well 
operators pay a percent of taxable value of sold products, of 
which a percentage goes to the fund. In the reporting period, 
New Mexico expended $6,130,113 from the fund to plug 396 
wells. Missouri and Nebraska reported the lowest expenditures 
and minimal plugging activity for the period $23,890 / 8 wells 
and $35,000 / 5 wells respectively. However, while Nebraska 
has a relatively small number of orphan wells on their data list, 
Missouri reports about 2,000. The number of wells waiting to 
be plugged in individual states at any given time may depend 
on a variety of factors, such as the number of oil and gas wells 
within the state regulatory program, the adequacy of security 
or financial assurance provided by oil and gas operators, 
the availability of state plugging funds and staff resources, 
and state procurement procedures. Legal issues arising from 
insolvency can also delay plugging by either their operators 
or the state.
Plugging funds expended. 
In the 1999 report 10 states reported spending $1 million 
or more on plugging orphan wells, with Texas far and away 
the leader at a reported $30.8 million. In the 2006 survey, 16 
states reported spending $1 million or more, with 5 states 
spending between $1 and $3 million, 3 states at $5 to $6 
million and 6 states spending between $8 and $13 million, and 
2 states spending upward of $26,000. Fourteen states reported 
significant increases in spending for the 2000 to 2006 period 
over the prior report, in some cases as much as 17 times as 
much or more. Three states reported declines in spending, 
while 5 states reported spending consistent with prior periods. 
Clearly as states have addressed the identification of orphan 
wells and as the industry’s fortunes have improved over recent 
times, states have been exceptionally diligent in addressing 
the need. Data tables are located in the Appendices.
Figure 3. Percent increase in wells plugged: All surveyed states by survey year
Survey Year # of Wells % increase (decrease)
1992 7,606
1996 12,274 61.37%
1999 23,658 92.75%
2006 28,089 18.73%
Total 71,627
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case0
Total	Plugging	Funds	Expended
All	surveyed	states
$160,000,000
$140,000,000
$120,000,000
$100,000,000
$80,000000
$60,000,000
$40,000,000
$20,000,000	
Funds	Expened
$
	 1992	 1996	 1999	 2008
•		$93,165,113
$144,935,556
•		$40,789,199		•	$40,877,763
•
	 1992	 1996	 1999
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
0
n	12,274
n	23,658
n	28,089
n	7,606
–n–	#	of	wells	plugged
–▲– Average	cost	perwell
▲	$5,354
▲	$3,330 ▲	$3,938 ▲	$5,160
Survey
year
Survey	year
Figure 4. Total plugging funds expended: All surveyed states by survey year
Figure 5. Total wells plugged by survey year/Average cost per well
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
Sources of state plugging funds.
The mechanisms used to supply the needed money to 
the state plugging funds vary greatly. Some states use general 
appropriations, but most state plugging funds sources can 
be grouped into four general categories: fees, public funds, 
revenue, and taxes. Individual states often leverage many 
different sources to address plugging orphan wells. For 
example, Michigan, Montana and Pennsylvania have two funds 
that can be used for the plugging of orphan wells. Michigan 
has an Environmental Remediation fund and an Orphan Well 
Fund. Pennsylvania has an Abandoned Well Plugging Fund 
and an Orphan Well Fund. Montana has a Resource Indemnity 
Trust Tax and a Damage Mitigation Account, which is funded 
by statutory appropriation plus bond forfeitures. From 1992 
until 2005, Arkansas used general funds on a case by case basis 
to plug orphan wells. In 2005, the state established a Plugging 
Fund, which has benefited their efforts significantly. In almost 
every case, the sources of funding are inextricably tied to the 
oil and natural gas exploration and production industry in each 
state. Levies, assessments, bonds or taxes are imposed on well 
operations and production. As a result, as the market price for 
oil and natural gas encourages exploration and production as 
it has over the recent period, funding available to states also 
improves. However, states are also tasked with addressing 
many long, unfunded needs, such as highways and bridges, so 
that funding for plugging orphan wells is not always a given. 
And, even with improved funding, the need often outstrips 
resources. Survey data shows that states have spent roughly 
$319.1 million to plug and remediate 71,618 wells nationally, 
for an average cost of $4,456 per well. If all of the nearly 
150,000 orphan wells identified in this survey required state 
plugging, the cost to the state oil and gas regulatory agencies 
would be in excess of $668 million. The reported balance in 
state plugging funds currently totals about $2.8 million, which 
is insufficient to cover the probable plugging costs to address 
the 59,781 orphan wells on the states’ waiting lists.
Figure 6. Sources of Plugging Funds: All surveyed states
State Fee Fine Public Revenue Tax
Alabama
Alaska p
Arkansas p
California p
Colorado
Illinois p
Indiana p p
Kansas p
Kentucky p
Louisiana
Michigan
Mississippi p
Missouri p
Montana p
Nebraska p
New Mexico p
New York p p p
North Dakota p p p p
Ohio
Oklahoma p
Pennsylvania p
Tennessee p
Texas
Utah
Virginia p
West Virginia
Wyoming
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
Figure 7. Sources of state plugging funds
Fees
Annual fee A routine fee charged to operators of oil and gas wells
Idle well fee A fee that operators pay for an inactive, unplugged well
Permit fee A fee that operators pay when they get a permit to produce
Civil penalties Penalty imposed by regulating authority for noncompliance
Settlements
Public Funds
Appropriations Legislative action authorizing the expenditure of public (state or local government) funds for some 
designated purpose
Operating budget State Oil and Gas Agency operating budget
Revenue
Forfeited bonds Deposited monies paid to ensure adequate funding is available for inactive well plugging by 
operators
Salvage Proceeds from the sale of any equipment or other items of value at plugging site
Taxes
Excise tax Tax imposed on the sale of specific goods or services, or on licenses to engage in certain activities 
(also called mil levy, conservation tax)
Production 
Assessment
A state or municipal tax on oil and gas products levied at the wellhead for the removal of the 
hydrocarbons. (Also called Severance Tax)
SECuRITy OR FInAnCIAL ASSuRAnCE
The primary purpose of security or financial assurance 
requirements in the producing states is to ensure proper 
plugging and abandonment of oil and gas wells in the event 
the operator becomes insolvent. Many states have made recent 
changes to upgrade their security and financial assurance 
requirements. The majority of oil and gas producing states 
require specific security or financial assurance in the form of 
a surety bond, cash, certificate of deposit or irrevocable letter 
of credit. The security or financial assurance can be used to 
ensure performance, plugging of the wellbore at the time of 
abandonment, restoration of the surface, or a combination of 
any of the above. The date that security or financial assurance 
requirements were established varies widely among the states, 
but the states where production started most recently have 
required security or financial assurance since the inception of 
their programs. States have security requirements for single 
wells as well as blanket bonds. Single well security may be 
based on well depth (15 states), a set fee structure (15 states), 
a hybrid of the two (North Dakota), or by acre of disturbed 
land (Virginia). Blanket bonds may likewise be based on the 
number of wells (8 states), a set fee structure (17 states) or a 
hybrid of the two (4 states).
Figure 8. Distribution of Security Types: 
All surveyed states
Type of Security # of 
states
% of 
states w/ 
type*
CD 24 80%
Cash 24 80%
Certificate of Insurance 1 3%
Escrow Account 2 7%
Financial Statements 7 23%
Letter of Credit 16 53%
Liens 2 7%
Security Interest 2 7%
Surety & Performance Bonds 30 100%
*30 states surveyed
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
Figure 9. Types of Securities Permitted by States
Type Definition
Cash Deposit A payment given as a guarantee that an obligation will be met
CD Certificate of Deposit
Certificate of Insurance A formal document used to record a fact and used as proof of the fact
Consolidated Financial 
Fund
A user-defined combination of several consolidation units, grouped together for consolidation 
and reporting purposes
Escrow Account
A separate bank account, segregated from a broker’s own funds, in which the broker is 
required by state law to deposit all monies collected for clients; in some states called a Trust 
Account
Financial Statements A report of basic accounting data that helps investors understand a firm’s financial history 
and activities
Letter of Credit, Irrevocable
A letter of credit where payment is guaranteed as long as the seller meets all conditions 
stipulated. A revocable letter of credit can be cancelled or altered by the buyer without 
permission of the seller
Liens The right to take another’s property if an obligation is not discharged
Performance Bonds A surety bond between two parties, insuring one party against loss if the terms of a contract 
are not fulfilled
Security Interest The creditor’s right to take property or a portion of property offered as security
Surety Bonds A contract by which one party agrees to make payment on any default or the debt of another 
party 
SALV AGE VALUE OF ORPHAN WELLS
While orphan wells represent an economic liability to the 
state as there is often inadequate or non-existent security to 
cover the cost of plugging these wells and the state must plug 
the well first and then attempt to claim the security, orphan 
wells are not necessarily without economic value. On younger 
wells, lease equipment, hydrocarbons in storage tanks on the 
location and hydrocarbons that remain in the reservoir have 
value. Some states attempt to realize any benefit from the assets 
remaining on such wells. Three states, Arizona, Nebraska and 
Utah, attempt to determine the potential value of remaining 
reservoir hydrocarbons prior to plugging a well. These states 
look variously for the potential of enhanced recovery methods 
and remaining production potential. Utah, along with a 
few other states, contacts operators of surrounding leases 
for interest in taking over an orphan well. In many cases, 
operators will do so to protect their hydrocarbon reservoirs 
and as good corporate citizens. 
Older wells do not frequently offer much in the way 
of salvage value. Texas has one of the most active well 
plugging programs. It reported only a very few wells had 
an equipment salvage value greater than the plugging costs. 
Usually equipment on the older wells, if still in place, has 
no resale value, only scrap metal value. In most states the 
contractor who plugs the well is allowed to take possession of 
the equipment, reducing the cost of plugging proportionate to 
the salvage value of the equipment. While some states have 
experienced difficulties in the bid evaluation process, this has 
generally proven to be an efficient and cost-saving solution. 
 
IOGCC: Lending a helping hand for the future
On a national front, the IOGCC has been 
committed to securing federal funding for the 
plugging of orphan wells. While states have made 
extensive efforts to find and plug their wells, 
federal funding could accelerate plugging wells 
posing the greatest hazards. 
“There are believed to be tens of thousands 
of orphan wells in this country. Many of these 
wells are very shallow and pose no risk to the 
environment. However there are others that are 
unplugged or inadequately plugged and are a 
genuine threat to the environment and safety. We 
have to focus on these problem wells and we are 
working with Congress on federal funding for a 
permanent fix.”
- North Dakota Governor John Hoeven, former 
chairman of the IOGCC, May 10, 2007, IOGCC 
2007 Midyear Issue Summit.
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
EFFORTS TO FIND & PLUG
Most states have inaugurated significant programs for 
identifying and addressing orphan wells. The states should be 
commended for these efforts, and the IOGCC will continue to 
encourage all states to find ways to identify and address their 
orphan wells. Following are some innovative efforts by states 
to gather resources, to search for wells, to plug them, or to 
utilize them. 
 
Pennsylvania: A Case Study 
Pennsylvania has produced oil and natural gas since 
1859 and for the first forty years was responsible for nearly 
half of the world’s production of oil until the east Texas oil 
boom in 1901. Most of Pennsylvania’s production of the 
period occurred around Titusville, in an area now known as 
Oil Creek State Park. Without the benefit of geologic science, 
Pennsylvania oilfields were discovered by physical evidence 
such as surface oil seeps. Wells were drilled at random and 
often very close together. A famous tintype from 1871 shows 
a location known as Triumph Hill with a veritable forest of 
wooden derricks. It would only be much later that petroleum 
engineers would understand that drilling too many well too 
closely together actually reduces production capability, as 
well as increasing environmental damage. At the time, all 
anyone worried about was fire. Drake’s first well lasted only a 
couple of months before being consumed by fire. 
With its long history of petroleum production, 
Pennsylvania was particularly concerned with orphan 
wells. Oil Creek State Park falls under the jurisdiction of 
the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural 
Resources (DCNR). To augment a small staff, the Park 
Manager would recruit summer interns to help canvas the 
park in search of orphan wells. Then, in 2002, a partnership 
was developed involving the Pennsylvania Department of 
Environmental Protection (DEP), the Environmental Alliance 
for Senior Involvement (EASI), and the Pennsylvania 
Senior Environment Corps (PaSEC), a statewide network 
of seniors who monitor water resources. EASI is a national 
nonprofit coalition of environmental, seniors, and volunteer 
organizations founded in 1991 following an agreement 
between the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
and the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP). 
EASI typically partners with national, state, and local public 
and private organizations to provide opportunities for seniors 
to play an active, visible role in improving the environment in 
their communities. 
PaSec, EASI, the Venango Conservation District, the 
DCNR and DEP established a pilot project 
to train and equip senior volunteers to locate and mark orphan 
wells in Oil Creek State Park. The Park offered a ready 
combination of key success factors for the project: state land 
ownership providing access and administrative support, a 
large probability of orphan wellsresulting from historical 
activity, and an active PaSEC volunteer cadre ready to go. 
DEP provided a startup grant of $40,000. 
“This is a tremendous opportunity to protect the 
environment in this beautiful state park, and potentially 
throughout northwestern Pennsylvania, where thousands of 
these abandoned, orphan wells exist. Oil can seep into and 
contaminate groundwater and surface water. Sinkholes can 
develop around these old wells, presenting a danger to 
hikers, hunters, and all visitors to Oil Creek State Park,” said 
Pennsylvania Secretary of Environmental Protection Kathleen 
A. McGinty.  
EASI has existing training programs for its members 
for its water monitoring projects. These programs include 
safety, site location and recording methodology. DEP and 
DCNR added training in operating hand-held global positions 
system units, mapping coordinates and downloading data for 
transmission to state databases. While in the field, volunteers 
had the support, as needed, of the Venango Conservation 
District and the Bureau of Oil and Gas management, DEP. 
The funding proficed hand-held GPS units, first aid kits, 
topographical maps and compasses, briar-proof pants, orange 
safety vests and hats, computer software, markers, flag and 
tags and digital cameras, as well as portable radios and walkie-
talkies to communicate with state park personnel.
“We always go out in teams, no less than three and I’d 
say six is about the most. We get in a spaced line, set a bearing 
and head for it. It’s hard to keep the line with the way the 
terrain dips and rises, but it’s important for safety and to be 
sure we’re covering the area. Sometimes a well site is just a 
depression in a field, maybe three or so feet across. We test 
the surface to see it’s an open shaft. We take photos, enter a 
description of the site and record the latitude and longitude. 
The report goes to the Venango Conservation District and the 
DEP, who verifies the data and adds the sites to the official 
list,” said John Kolojejchick, one of the senior volunteers 
participating in the Oil Creek pilot program. 
As of October 2003, the PaSEC volunteers had identified 
57 potential orphan wells. By June 2007, the volunteers have 
found and marked more than 317 orphan wells in Oil Creek 
State Park. With the pilot program proving so successful, the 
project alliance moved forward to launch a second phase, with 
an additional $20,000 in funding and the desire of the seniors 
to increase the area of interest and build participation in the
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
program. Four areas were added to the project to include some 
game lands and forestry preserves. Four years since inception, 
the project has found, marked, and stored in the database the 
location of more than 360 orphan wells. They have logged 
880 volunteer hours and spent a mere $60,000. More than 225 
of these wells have been plugged. 
In addition to its extensive efforts to find and plug orphan 
wells; Pennsylvania also is attempting to track down liable 
operators. Where the state determines that a prior owner or 
operator received economic benefit subsequent to April 18, 
1979, other than benefit derived only as a landowner or from a 
royalty interest, from an orphan well or from a well which has 
not been registered, such owner or operator is held responsible 
for plugging of the well. 
Pennsylvania’s orphan well program demonstrates that 
identifying orphan wells need not be a job restricted to the 
young or professional, or for that matter, those who get paid to 
do it. Nor does it necessarily require an extensive budget. The 
key ingredient for success is collaboration. Pennsylvania used 
a collaborative style that extended beyond agency offices to 
embrace the support and involvement of the community. By 
sharing resources, expertise and support, the project became 
affordable and effective.
California: Adopt-a-well
California’s Orphan Well Program has been authorized to 
plug and abandon idle-deserted wells since 1976. From 1977 
to 2004, 1,062 orphan wells were plugged at a cost of $14.8 
million. The program is authorized to spend up to $1 million 
a year to plug orphan wells. A list of orphan wells in the state 
is maintained for adoption under the “adopt a well” program. 
This program allows prospective operators to enter into an 
agreement to test for further extraction of an orphan well for up 
to 90 days without incurring any liability for plugging. After 
this time, if the test is successful, the prospective operator 
can then adopt the well by posting a bond and becoming its 
permanent operator. If the test is unsuccessful, the prospective 
operator can walk away from the agreement without incurring 
any liability. 
Oklahoma: Voluntary assessment
In 1993, leaders representing Oklahoma’s oil producers 
and royalty owners, working with the Oklahoma Legislature, 
formed the Oklahoma Energy Resources Board (OERB). 
Oklahoma’s natural gas producers joined soon after. At the 
heart of OERB’s mission is the on-going commitment to 
restoring Oklahoma’s orphaned and abandoned well sites left 
by operators who have since disappeared. Site restoration 
includes (1) the removal of equipment, concrete, trash and 
debris; (2) soil erosion and scarring repair; (3) the removal 
of hydrocarbons; (4) closing of pits; and (5) the removal of 
lease roads and location pads (OERB 2008). Funded through 
a voluntary assessment paid by producers and royalty owners 
on the sale of oil and natural gas in Oklahoma, OERB’s 
environmental restorations cost landowners and taxpayers 
nothing. Since 1994, Oklahoma’s oil and natural gas producers 
and royalty owners have voluntarily contributed $70 million. 
OERB has restored more than 7,800 abandoned sites. 
Texas: Production tax incentives
As an incentive to put orphan wells back into production 
in Texas, the Legislature passed a bill to exempt gas and 
casinghead gas from any well the Texas Railroad Commission 
certified as an orphan. When the certified orphan well is 
put back into production by an approved operator, the well 
is eligible for a 100 percent exemption from natural gas 
production tax and the oilfield cleanup fee for as long as the 
certified operator manages the well. 
Michigan: Industry support
Michigan’s Orphan Well Fund was established in 1994 
with revenue from a severance tax on the oil and gas industry. 
Two percent of the severance tax revenue, but not less than 
$1 million, is credited to the fund annually. This funding 
goes toward plugging, response activity, or site restoration 
at abandoned or improperly closed oil and gas wells. For 
Fiscal Year 2004-2005, the total cost for plugging, response 
activity, and site restoration for all projects was $1,167,235. 
However, $164,463 was returned to the Orphan Well Fund as 
a result of sales from well tubing, casing, and equipment, and 
$67,610 from the collection of well bonds. Fiscal Year 2004-
2005 represented the tenth year that funds were expended 
from the fund. Nineteen wells were plugged, interim response 
activities were performed on three wells, and eight oil storage 
tanks were remediated. 
Michigan also deposits funds from salvaged equipment 
from plugged well sites into their Orphan Well Fund. In 2006, 
the value of salvage totaled $160,845. Further, the Office of 
Geological Survey posts a list of orphaned wells on its Web 
site. Operators are allowed to take over orphaned wells if they 
get leases for the minerals under the original drilling unit.
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
CANADIAN PROVINCES
The U.S. is not unique in dealing with the issue of orphan 
wells. All oil and gas producing countries have similar 
issues. In Canada, the provinces have taken aggressive steps 
in partnership with industry to identify and reclaim orphan 
wells, pipelines and facilities.
Alberta: Government/Industry collaborative partnership
Alberta has an Oil and Gas Orphan Abandonment and 
Reclamation Association operating as a non-profit organization 
under the registered trade name of the Orphan Well Association 
(OWA). The OWA operates under the delegated authority of 
the Alberta Energy and Utilities Board (EUB). OWA was 
established as a joint initiative between the upstream oil and 
gas industry and the provincial government in January 2002 
and commenced operations on April 1, 2002. The Alberta 
government supports this initiative to deal with upstream 
oil and gas orphans through its regulatory agencies, Alberta 
Energy and Utilities Board (EUB) and Alberta Environment 
(AENV) which: (1) initiate appropriate enforcement actions to 
ensure that the responsible parties address their obligations to 
deal with their well and facility abandonment and reclamation 
liabilities, and (2) develop appropriate policies to minimize 
unfunded orphan liability and to prevent new orphans. The 
purpose of the OWA is to manage the abandonment and 
reclamation of upstream oil and gas orphan wells, pipelines, 
facilities and their associated sites. 
The OWA provides information on its activities to a 
stakeholder group known as the Fund Advisory Committee 
or FAC. The FAC provides advice and input into the ongoing 
development of government policies related to upstream oil 
and gas orphans. Members of the FAC include representatives 
from industry - Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers 
(CAPP), Small Explorers and Producers Association of 
Canada (SEPAC), and representatives from the provincial 
government - the Alberta Energy and Utilities Board (EUB), 
Alberta Environment (AENV), Alberta Department of 
Energy (AE), and Alberta Sustainable Resource Development 
(ASRD).
The OWA operates under the direction of its members who 
include:  the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers 
(CAPP), the Small Explorers and Producers Association of 
Canada (SEPAC), and the EUB.  Industry funds all of the 
costs incurred by the OWA, mostly through an Orphan Fund 
Levy.  This levy is based on the abandonment and reclamation 
liabilities held by each company and it is collected annually 
by the EUB and remitted to the OWA.
Fiscal Year 2005/06 was a benchmark year of operations 
for OWA. Expenditures on operational activities increased 
to an historical high of almost $12 million compared to 
almost $9 million the previous year. The focus of OWA’s 
operations shifted in 2005/2006 from well abandonment to 
site reclamation, allowing OWA to catch up on its inventory 
of outstanding well abandonments. A significant proportion 
of OWA’s operations was dedicated to remediation (dealing 
with contaminants) on orphan sites. 
Saskatchewan: Updates its regulations
Saskatchewan Industry and Resources recently announced 
efforts to revise its regulatory environment to make it more 
relevant to current oil and gas development practices and 
technology. In 1989, the province had established an Oil and 
Gas Environmental Fund to address the costs of reclaiming 
orphan wells. Government and industry leaders have worked 
together as a group to establish new funding rules. The 
proposed changes address two key components: a security 
deposit system and an annual orphan fund levy. A security 
deposit is collected from companies whose liability is 
greater than their assets, with the difference between the two 
comprising the amount of the security deposit.  This serves the 
dual purposes of preventing an individual without sufficient 
economic means from acquiring oil and gas wells or facilities 
and secondly should the company become bankrupt, then 
the security deposit will cover the cost of decommissioning 
and reclaiming the orphan property. In a case where the 
security deposit amount is insufficient to cover the cost of the 
necessary work, all of the oil and gas companies operating in 
Saskatchewan will be levied a fee, The Orphan Fund Levy, to 
make up the shortfall. 
RECOMMENDATIONS
There are approximately 50,000 wells awaiting plugging 
that have been prioritized according to the environmental 
threats they pose. Plugging all orphan wells would be an 
extremely large financial burden on the states. Today’s 
petroleum prices provide an incentive to identify and address 
orphan wells because the revenue to the states has increased 
and this, combined with modern technology, has enabled the 
states to respond to the need more aggressively. 
States should be commended for their efforts to date, both 
in finding and remediating orphan wells. The states have also 
set up regulatory structures that require adequate bonding or 
insurance coverage, in an effort to prevent the likelihood of 
orphan wells in the future.  
It must, however, be noted that while states have
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
established plugging funds, those funds are insufficient 
to address timely cleanup of the remaining orphan wells. 
Therefore, it’s essential that the states, along with IOGCC, 
continue to explore innovative and financial means to plug 
all existing orphan wells. As unremediated orphan wells 
can cause as much damage to precious petroleum resource 
reserves as to the surface environment or to water resources, 
assistance from many directions is needed to help the states in 
their efforts. 
An orphan oil and gas well plugging program for the 
states was established in Section 349 (g) and (h) of the Energy 
Policy Act of 2005. That legislation authorizes up to $20 
million annually in federal matching funds to help states plug 
their abandoned wells. However, to date no money has been 
appropriated. IOGCC will continue to present the cause and to 
educate Congress about the issues and costs related to orphan 
wells with the goal of seeing this legislation meet its intended 
goal to help the states address this significant environmental 
issue.
IOGCC encourages the states to continue their efforts 
to plug these orphaned wells in a logical manner, focusing 
on wells posing the greatest threats. States are encouraged 
to review the adequacy of financial assurance requirements 
for operators/owners to ensure future orphan wells will be 
plugged without public funds. 
Still other states have employed creative approaches to 
find undocumented orphan wells for evaluation and to increase 
plugging funds. Those stories are presented here in an effort 
to provide states with access to new approaches that they may 
find useful. The IOGCC is also conducting a study of the well-
closure process in hopes of identifying lower cost materials 
and processes to stretch limited plugging funds. 
Further, both in the states and elsewhere, it is clear that 
the oil and natural gas industry can be creative and important 
partners in addressing this significant issue. The IOGCC urges 
states and industry to continue to work in partnership and to 
find ways in which to expand that partnership.
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
DATA TABLES
Figure 10. Plugging Funds Expended: All surveyed states per survey period 
*Fields marked with an “*” indicate that no data was reported or available for that survey period
State Survey Year Plugging funds expended # of wells plugged Average Cost per Well
Alabama
1992 * * *
1996 * * *
1999 * * *
2006 * * *
Alabama Total * * *
Alaska
1992 * * *
1996 * * *
1999 * * *
2006 200,000 5 40,000
Alaska Total 200,000 5 40,000
Arkansas
1992 2,500 3 833
1996 75,500 8 9,438
1999 110,000 20 5,500
2006 990,000 178 5,562
Arkansas Total 1,178,000 209 5,636
California
1992 2,887,000 179 16,128
1996 1,585,000 70 22,643
1999 4,543,000 431 10,541
2006 8,390,282 451 18,604
California Total 17,405,282 1,131 15,389
Colorado
1992 132,193 2 66,097
1996 454,199 30 15,140
1999 867,085 104 8,337
2006 1,671,944 82 20,390
Colorado Total 3,125,421 218 14,337
Florida 2006 650,000 9 72,222
Florida Total 650,000 9 72,222
Illinois
1992 75,000 12 6,250
1996 1,025,000 243 4,218
1999 1,800,000 783 2,299
2006 10,100,000 2,162 4,672
Illinois Total 13,000,000 3,200 4,063
Indiana
1992 75,000 * *
1996 125,000 9 13,889
1999 340,000 73 4,658
2006 361,297 25 14,452
Indiana Total 901,297 107 8,423
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
*Fields marked with an “*” indicate that no data was reported or available for that survey period
State Survey Year Plugging funds expended # of wells plugged Average Cost per Well
Kansas
1992 * * *
1996 1,528,000 1,250 1,222
1999 6,983,000 1,892 3,691
2006 13,366,630 4,542 2,943
Kansas Total 21,877,630 7,684 2,847
Kentucky
 
 
 
 
    
1992 619,000 432 1,433
1996 704,150 204 3,452
1999 1,726,850 804 2,148
2006 3,557,034 1,603 2,219
Kentucky Total 6,607,034 3,043 2,171
Louisiana
1992 153,606 6 25,601
1996 3,246,394 121 26,830
1999 14,431,000 627 23,016
2006 27,169,000 974 27,894
Louisiana Total 45,000,000 1,728 26,042
Michigan
1992 1,110,900 50 22,218
1996 1,133,000 50 22,660
1999 6,789,100 100 67,891
2006 4,644,874 47 98,827
Michigan Total 13,677,874 247 55,376
Mississippi
1992 * * *
1996 300,000 30 10,000
1999 500,000 55 9,091
2006 3,380,000 255 13,255
Mississippi Total 4,180,000 340 12,294
Missouri
1992 22,000 25 880
1996 21,000 40 525
1999 22,500 69 326
2006 23,890 8 2,986
Missouri Total 89,390 142 630
Montana
1992 725,000 9 80,556
1996 1,180,000 46 25,652
1999 3,180,000 137 23,212
2006 3,291,481 315 10,449
Montana Total 8,376,481 507 16,522
Nebraska
1992 * * *
1996 * * *
1999 * * *
2006 35,000 5 7,000
Nebraska Total 35,000 5 7,000
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case0
*Fields marked with an “*” indicate that no data was reported or available for that survey period
State Survey Year Plugging funds expended # of wells plugged Average Cost per Well
New Mexico
1992 * * *
1996 * * *
1999 556,536 43 12,943
2006 6,130,113 424 14,458
New Mexico Total 6,686,649 467 14,318
  New York
 
 
1992 83,000 3 27,667
1996 250,000 6 41,667
1999 250,000 6 41,667
2006 250,000 48 5,208
New York Total 833,000 63 13,222
North Dakota
1992 50,000 * *
1996 63,000 3 21,000
1999 226,000 11 20,545
2006 225,000 8 28,125
North Dakota Total 564,000 22 25,636
Ohio
1992 11,200,000 1,127 9,938
1996 11,200,000 1,127 9,938
1999 12,256,000 1,372 8,933
2006 26,000,000 1,739 14,951
Ohio Total 60,656,000 5,365 11,306
Oklahoma
1992 889,000 292 3,045
1996 2,360,762 514 4,593
1999 5,970,000 1,455 4,103
2006 3,963,564 1,497 2,648
Oklahoma Total 13,183,326 3,758 3,508
Pennsylvania
1992 814,000 38 21,421
1996 964,000 43 22,419
1999 814,000 57 14,281
2006 12,755,310 1,555 8,203
Pennsylvania Total 15,347,310 1,693 9,065
Texas
1992 21,858,000 5,402 4,046
1996 14,216,158 8,421 1,688
1999 30,823,842 15,476 1,992
2006 11,293,316 11,848 953
Texas Total 78,191,316 41,147 1,900
  Utah
 
1992 * * *
1996 106,000 14 7,571
1999 283,000 46 6,152
2006 714,594 22 32,482
Utah Total 1,103,594 82 13,458
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
*Fields marked with an “*” indicate that no data was reported or available for that survey period
State Survey Year Plugging funds expended # of wells plugged Average Cost per Well
  Virginia
 
 
1992 * * *
1996 * * *
1999 250,000 11 22,727
2006 150,000 13 11,538
Virginia Total 400,000 24 16,667
 West Virginia
 
1992 102,000 26 3,923
1996 258,000 39 6,615
1999 205,800 22 9,355
2006 1,049,227 41 25,591
West Virginia Total 1,615,027 128 12,617
  Wyoming
 
 
1992 * * *
1996 82,600 6 13,767
1999 237,400 64 3,709
2006 4,573,000 233 19,627
Wyoming Total 4,893,000 303 16,149
Grand Total  319,776,631 71,627 4,464
Figure 11. Securities Permitted by Surveyed States
State
Date Security First 
Required
Modified Since 2000 
Survey
Regulatory Authority 
Adjustment Permitted
Separate Site 
Restoration Bond
CD
Cash
Certificate of Insurance
Consolidated Financial 
Fund
Escrow Account
Financial Statements
Letter of Credit
Liens
Security Interest
Surety and/or 
Performance Bonds
Alabama 1945 ü ü
Alaska 1958 ü ü ü ü ü
Arizona 1959 ü ü ü ü ü
Arkansas 1983 ü ü ü ü ü
California 1931 ü ü ü
Colorado 1951 ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü
Florida 1946 ü ü ü ü ü ü
Illinois 1939 ü ü ü ü
Indiana 1947 ü ü ü ü
Kansas 1982 ü ü ü ü ü ü
Kentucky
Louisiana 2000 ü ü ü ü ü
Maryland 1957 ü ü ü ü
Michigan 1931 ü ü ü ü ü ü
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
State
Date Security First 
Required
Modified Since 2000 
Survey
Regulatory Authority 
Adjustment Permitted
Separate Site 
Restoration Bond
CD
Cash
Certificate of Insurance
Consolidated Financial 
Fund
Escrow Account
Financial Statements
Letter of Credit
Liens
Security Interest
Surety and/or 
Performance Bonds
Mississippi 1992 ü ü ü ü
Missouri 1966 ü ü ü ü
Montana 1954 ü ü ü ü
Nebraska 1959 ü ü ü ü
Nevada 1954 ü ü ü ü
New Mexico 1935 ü ü ü ü ü ü
New York 1963 ü ü ü ü
North Dakota 1941 ü ü
Ohio 1963 ü ü ü ü ü
Oklahoma 1922 ü ü ü ü ü
Pennsylvania 1985 ü ü ü
Tennessee 1943 ü ü ü
Texas 1983 ü ü ü
Utah 1955 ü ü ü ü ü
Virginia 1955 ü ü ü
West Virginia 1963 ü ü ü ü ü
Wyoming 1951 ü ü ü ü
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
Figure 12. State security or financial assurance requirements: Single wells
State Security Depth (feet) or Criteria Conditions
Alabama MIN $5,000 
MAX $50,000 
Alaska MIN $100,000 Single well bonds allowed for estimated 
cost of P & A if less than $100,000
Arizona MIN $10,000 
MAX $20,000 
< 10,000
> 10,000
Arkansas MIN $3,000 
MAX $15,000 
California
MIN $15,000 
$20,000 
MAX $30,000 
< 5,000
5,001 - 9,999
> 10,000
Colorado $5,000 
Florida $50,000 
$100,000 
< 9,000
> 9,000
$100,000 / producer
$200,000 / producer
Illinois $1,500 
$3,000 
< 2,000
> 2,000
Indiana $2,500 
Kansas $1 Multiplied times the aggregate depth for 
all wells drilled or operated
Louisiana
$1 per foot
$2 per foot
$3 per foot
< 3,000
3,001 - 9,999
> 10,000
Maryland MIN $100,000 
Michigan MIN $10,000 
MAX $30,000 
Mississippi
$10,000 
$15,000 
$30,000 
$50,000 
< 10,000
10,001 - 16,000
16,001 - 20,000
> 20,000
Missouri
$1,000 
$2,000 
$3,000 
$4,000 
$4,000 
0 - 500
501 - 1,000
1,001 - 2,000
2,001 - 5000
 + $1/ ft > 5,001
Montana
$1,500 
$5,000 
$10,000 
< 2,000
2,001 - 3,500
> 3,500
Nebraska $5,000 
Nevada $10,000 
New Mexico
$5,000 
$10,000 
+ $1/ft
+ $1/ft
Major producing counties
Other counties
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
State Security Depth (feet) or Criteria Conditions
New York
$2,500 
$5,000 
Varies
< 2,500
2,501 - 6,000
> 6,000
Security covers plugging & restoration
Anticipated costs 
North Dakota $20,000 
Wells drilled to a total depth of 2,000 feet 
may be bonded in a lesser amount upon 
approval
Ohio $5,000 
Oklahoma Varies As established by licensed plugger
Pennsylvania $2,500 
Tennessee $5,000 
Texas $2 per foot Total aggregate depth
Utah $15,000 
$120,000 
< 1,000
> 1,000
Virginia $10,000 + $2,000
 / per acre
West Virginia $5,000 
Wyoming $10,000 
$20,000 
< 2,000
> 2,000
Figure 13. State security or financial assurance requirements: Blanket bonds
State Blanket Bond # of Wells Amount / Conditions
Alabama $100,000
Alaska Minimum $200,000
Arizona
$25,000
$50,000
$250,000
10
10 – 50
> 50
Can be required on state leases
Arkansas
$25,000
$50,000
$100,000
< 50
> 50
> 100
California
$100,000
$250,000
$1,000,000
< 50
> 50
All wells
Colorado $30,000
$100,000
< 100
> 100
For surface:
$2,000 for non-irrigated land
$5,000 for irrigated land
$25,000 blanket statewide assurance
Florida $1,000,000 10
Illinois
$25,000
$50,000
$100,000
< 25
26 – 50
> 50
Indiana $45,000
Kansas MIN $15,000
MAX $45,000 Varies according to depth
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
State Blanket Bond # of Wells Amount / Conditions
Louisiana
$25,000
$125,000
$250,000
< 10
11 – 99
> 100
Maryland MAX $500,000
Michigan MIN $100,000
MAX $250,000 One performance bond covers all wells
Mississippi $100,000
Missouri $20,000
$30,000
< 50 (0 -800 ft)
< 15 (801 – 1,200 ft)
Montana $50,000
Nebraska $25,000
Nevada $50,000
New Mexico $50,000
New York $25,000 - $100,000
$40,000 - $150,000
North Dakota $50,000
$100,000
< 10
> 10
The $50,000 blanket bond is limited in 
its coverage to contain no more than 
three unplugged dry holes, plugged 
wells with site not reclaimed, and/or 
abandoned wells;
The $100,000 bond is limited to six
Ohio $15,000
$30,000 $30,000 bond for financial statements
Oklahoma $25,000
$50,000 Net worth for financial statement
Pennsylvania $25,000 Security covers drilling, plugging, water 
supply, replacement and restoration
Tennessee $20,000 Required when the landowner/lessee is 
not party to the leasing agreement
Texas
$25,000
$50,000
$250,000
1 – 10
11 – 99
>100
For reclamation plants only; in the 
amount required to close the facility
Utah
$15,000
$30,000
$60,000
1000 – 3000
3,001 – 10,000
>10,000
Security covers drilling, plugging, water 
supply, replacement and restoration
Virginia
$25,000
$50,000
$75,000
$100,000
1 – 15
16 – 30
31 – 50
> 50
West Virginia $50,000
Wyoming $75,000
Additional amount may be required for 
dormant wells or pits; Agency requires 
bonding for some pits
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
Figure 14. Salvage Valuation
State Valuation methodology Anecdotal Information
Arkansas Competitive bid by plugging contractors Value of well site production equipment is used to offset 
plugging cost
California Competitive bid by plugging contractors Value of well site production equipment is used to offset 
plugging cost
Colorado Competitive bid by plugging contractors  
Illinois Current market value  Surface equipment value estimated only
Indiana Competitive bid by resellers
State agency attempts to locate an interested operator to 
produce wells; Wells that cause environmental damages 
are plugged
Kansas Sealed bid 
Wells must be determined to have no economic value 
before state plugging. Proceeds from salvage are 
deposited in the Abandoned Well Plugging Fund (approx 
$60,000/year)
Kentucky Competitive bid by plugging contractors
Louisiana Competitive bid by plugging contractors Bidders separately identify and place value on each piece 
of salvage equipment on a well-by-well basis
Michigan  
Any funds from salvage are returned to the Orphan Well 
Fund. For the 2006 plugging season, the value of salvage 
was $160,845.
Mississippi Competitive bid by plugging contractors  
Nebraska
Nebraska has typically not included the value in a cost 
estimate to plug a well. Contractors have been selected on 
the basis of their ability to do the required work and their 
price sheets and not a firm bid. Cost of abandonment is 
based on time worked. Wells are evaluated to determine a 
level of interest by other operators who may wish to bond 
and utilize the wells.
The companies performing the plugging work have sold 
the equipment and retained 10% of the sales price. The 
remaining 90% of the value has been credited back on the 
final invoice for the plugging of the wells.
North Dakota Current market value  
Ohio Current market value
ORC 1509.072 states that this has to be done. Rarely, 
is there any equipment or asset value. Salvage value is 
deducted from the contract price by plugging contractor.
Oklahoma  Competitive bid by plugging contractors  
Utah Current market value
A full procedure and cost analysis is prepared for each 
well prior to bidding out the projects. Aside from a 
brief review of production history, reserves are not fully 
estimated. However, operators in the vicinity are notified 
that the well is going to be plugged and have the option 
to take over the well. Salvage value, if any is included 
in the cost analysis and would be considered as part of a 
responsible bid.
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
STATE SUMMARIES
STATE SuMMARy InTRODuCTIOn 
States have statutory authorities and regulatory 
mechanisms to address orphan wells.  While the IOGCC 
provided a definition for “orphan well” for purposes of 
this study, state definitions vary and are included in this 
category.  Some states differentiate between abandoned and 
orphaned wells, and those definitions are also reflected in 
this category.  Also included, is the specific information from 
the individual states concerning the date of establishment of 
the state regulatory program, the authorities used to regulate 
abandoned, idle, and orphan wells, statutory or regulatory 
definitions, and changes or improvements in programs.  A 
synopsis of state authorities and definitions is included in 
Appendices A through FF.
Over the course of the four survey periods, some elements 
begin to emerge as points of note. In the first survey year, 1992, 
only 17 states reported any plugging activity. Texas reported 
plugging 5,402 wells, followed by Ohio at 1,127 and Kansas 
with 1,060. Kentucky reported plugging 432 and Oklahoma, 
292. The rest of the numbers reported were less than 50 and 
most below 30. Waiting lists were obviously random in most 
cases and the average costs to plug were reported at a high 
for Montana of $80,000 and a low for Arkansas of $833, with 
most reporting within the range of 16,000 to 27,000. By the 
second survey period reported in 1996, 22 states reported 
plugging activity and the leaders in volume remained the 
same. The waiting lists were clearly becoming more defined, 
with eight states reporting zero, six reporting 30 or less, six 
states reporting waiting lists numbering in the thousands and 
five in the hundreds. Generally costs to plug went up and 
began to show more diversity. The new leader in high costs 
was Colorado at $125,038 (a standing record) and the low was 
Missouri at $1,075. Most of the reporting states clustered into 
three cost ranges: $2,000 to $4,000, $9,000 to $17,000 and 
$22,000 to $25,000.
In the third reporting period, the study of 1999 showed 
that only four states reported no plugging activity. Texas 
and Kansas remained the first and second leader in plugging 
activity reporting 15,476 and 1,892 wells plugged respectively. 
Third place turned into a cluster of states: Oklahoma (1,455), 
Kentucky (1440), Ohio (1,372) and Illinois (1,038). Waiting 
lists also moved up in numbers with only six states reporting 
zero wells, five reporting 20 or less, nine reporting in the 
hundreds and five reporting in the thousands. That period’s 
leader in average plugging costs was New York at $41,667 and 
the low was Missouri at $949. Nine states reported costs in the 
range of $2,000 to $6,000, four states reported cost ranges of 
$13,000 to $19,000 and five reported costs above $22,000.
For this most current study period, only three states 
reported no plugging activity. Texas and Kansas retained their 
leadership positions, 10,910 and 4,542 respectively. Only 
two states clustered in the third position, Illinois at 3,200 and 
Kentucky at 3,043. The waiting lists, however, continued to 
develop with only two reporting no wells, ten states reported 
in the thousands and six reported in the hundreds. Michigan 
reported the high in average plugging costs at $55,376, with 
Alaska a strong second at $40,000. The low cost state was 
Tennessee at $1,035. The ranges became somewhat more 
blurred with a defined clump reporting in the $1,000 to $5,000 
range, but almost a steady progression from $7,000 up to 
28,000.
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
Regulatory Authority
State Oil and Gas Board
PO Box 869999
Tuscaloosa, AL 35486-6999
www.ogb.state.al.us
Background
Regulation of oil and gas wells in Alabama began in 
1945 through legislation establishing the State Oil and 
Gas Board. The act provided the authority to regulate 
oil and gas wells, protect ground water, and provide for 
plugging, abandonment, and bonding. State Oil and Gas 
Board regulations were promulgated effective Oct. 1, 1946, 
to regulate these activities. Section 917-6 of the Code of 
Alabama provides for regulation of oil and gas wells by 
requiring the “drilling, casing and plugging of wells to be 
done in such a manner as to prevent the escape of oil and gas 
out of one stratum to another,” and “to prevent the pollution 
of fresh water supplies by oil, gas or salt water.” 
Alabama has established a Well Plugging Fund to 
collect and disburse fees for the purpose of plugging coalbed 
methane gas wells. The fund will be used when the failure to 
plug a well poses a threat to the environment or to the public 
health, safety or welfare.
State Plugging Efforts
Currently, Alabama does not have a plugging fund 
dedicated to orphan wells. State plugging funds are 
dedicated to plugging coalbed methane gas wells.
Sources of Plugging Funds
Fee Permit fee
Definitions
Abandoned Well
Alabama statutes define an abandoned well as one that 
has not been used for six consecutive months and cannot 
be operated, whether because it is a dry hole or production 
has ceased, or operations have not been conducted, or for 
other reasons.
Orphan Well
Alabama does not statutorily define an orphan well, per 
se, but addresses abandoned wells.
Temporarily Abandoned Well
A temporarily abandoned well is statutorily defined as 
a well currently not producing oil and/or gas that has been 
approved for future utility by the state supervisor.
Blanket Bonds  
 Amount Add’l Criteria Number of Wells 
Base $100,00  
Single Well Securities
 Amount Add’l Criteria Depth         
Maximum $50,000   
Minimum $5,000
Statutory Authorities
Plugging Fund
Coalbed Methane Gas Plugging Fund: Ala. Code § 9-17-133
Authority to Regulate
Ala. Code 1975 § 9-17-6
Definitions
Alabama Oil & Gas Regulations § 400-1-1-05
Security or Financial Assurance 
Date Security First Required:  1945
 Modified Since 2000 Survey £
 Regulatory Authority Adjustment  R 
 Separate Site Restoration Bond £
Types of Security Bonds Allowed
CD £	
Cash £	
Certificate of Insurance £
Consolidated Financial Fund £
Escrow Account £
Financial Statements £
Letter of Credit £
Liens £ 
Security Interest £
Surety and/or Performance Bonds R 
 
Appendix A: Alabama
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
Regulatory Authority
Alaska Oil & Gas Commission
333 West Seventh Avenue, Suite 100
Anchorage, AK 99501-3935
www.state.ak.us/local/
Background
The Alaska Oil and Gas Conservation Commission 
began its regulation of oil and gas wells on Oct. 1, 1958. AS 
31.05.030 describes the commission’s authority to regulate 
oil and gas wells in the state. Plugging and abandonment 
regulations began in 1958 and were revised in 1986 and 
1999. Ground water protection began generally in 1958. 
Authority to take primacy under the Safe Drinking Water Act 
began in 1984 and was revised in 1986 and 1999.
State Plugging Efforts
Sources of Plugging Funds
Public Operating budget
Definitions
Abandoned Well
An abandoned well is defined as a well plugged in 
accordance with 20 AAC 25.112, which dictates the setting 
of subsurface and surface plugs.
Temporarily Abandoned Well
Alaska does not use the term temporarily abandoned 
well, but rather uses the terms “suspended” and “shut-in” in 
the state’s regulations. In Alaska, a suspended well is a well 
plugged in accordance with 20 AAC 25.110 with a reserved 
option to re-enter and re-drill the well or complete the 
well. A shut-in well is defined as a well where the surface, 
wellhead, or subsurface valves have been closed to halt flow 
from or into the well, with the completion interval remaining 
open to the tubing below the closed valves.
 
Blanket Bonds  
 Amount Add’l Criteria Number of Wells  
Minimum $200,00
Single Well Securities
 Amount Add’l Criteria Depth          
Maximum $100,000
Single well bonds allowed for estimated cost of P & A if less than 
$100,000
Statutory Authorities
Abandoned Wells
 20 AAC 25.105 and 20 AAC 25.112
Authority to Regulate
Alaska Statute Title 31 Chap 5 §31.05.030
Security or Financial Assurance 
Date Security First Required:  1958
 Modified Since 2000 Survey £
 Regulatory Authority Adjustment  R 
 Separate Site Restoration Bond R
Types of Security Bonds Allowed
CD R	
Cash £	
Certificate of Insurance £
Consolidated Financial Fund £
Escrow Account £
Financial Statements £
Letter of Credit R
Liens £ 
Security Interest £
Surety and/or Performance Bonds R 
Appendix B: Alaska
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case0
Appendix C: Arizona
Regulatory Authority
Arizona Geological Survey
416 West Congress Street, Suite 100
Tucson, AZ 85701
www.azgs.state.az.us
Background
The Arizona Oil and Gas Conservation Commission 
was established in 1959 to administer the Conservation Act 
of 1951, which was expanded in 1978 to include regulation 
of enhanced recovery, disposal and storage wells. As of 
July 1991, the Arizona Geological Survey provides staff 
support to the commission to administer and enforce the 
laws relating to the conservation of oil and gas. Rules 
promulgated pursuant to statutory authority are reviewed 
every five years and new rules are adopted, outdated rules 
repealed, and existing rules amended as necessary to be 
consistent with applicable federal law, and to account for 
technological advances and currently accepted practices in 
the regulated industry. In 1995, Arizona amended its laws to 
allow the commission to forfeit the bond of owners who fail 
to properly plug each dry or abandoned well and to sue them 
for plugging costs in excess of the bond amount. The Arizona 
Department of Water Resources has authority over water 
wells, and the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality 
has authority over Class I, III, IV , and V injection wells.
State Plugging Efforts
Arizona has no orphan wells, and therefore has no need 
for plugging efforts relative to such wells.
Definitions
Abandoned Well
An abandoned well is defined as one that is not 
producing, injecting, or plugged and is not capable of being 
put to some future beneficial use.
Temporarily Abandoned Well
Arizona defines a temporarily abandoned well as a well 
that is not producing, injecting, or plugged but might be 
capable of being put to some future beneficial use.
Blanket Bonds  
 Amount Add’l Criteria Number of Well   
Minimum $25,000  10
Mid $50,000  10 - 50
Maximum $250,00  > 50
Single Well Securities
 Amount Add’l Criteria Depth       
Maximum $20,000 > 10,000
Minimum $10,000 < 10,000
Can be required on state leases
Statutory Authorities
Plugging Oil and Gas Wells
27-524(E), and 27-516 (A)(3)
Authority to Regulate
27-515, and 27-516
Security or Financial Assurance 
Date Security First Required:  1959
 Modified Since 2000 Survey £
 Regulatory Authority Adjustment  R 
 Separate Site Restoration Bond R
Types of Security Bonds Allowed
CD R	
Cash R	
Certificate of Insurance £
Consolidated Financial Fund £
Escrow Account £
Financial Statements £
Letter of Credit £
Liens £ 
Security Interest £
Surety and/or Performance Bonds R
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
Appendix D: Arkansas
Regulatory Authority
Oil & Gas Commission
301 Natural Resources Drive, Suite 102
Little Rock, AR 72205
www.aogc.state.ar.us
Background
Arkansas began regulating oil and gas wells in 1939. 
Required plugging and abandonment procedures were also 
enacted in 1939, as were efforts for the protection of ground 
water. The Arkansas Oil and Gas Commission is the state 
office responsible for enforcing the regulations. A significant 
revision to the regulations was adopted in 1983 to include 
bonding or a letter of credit for security purposes. In 1995, 
the state reduced its bonding
State Plugging Efforts
The Arkansas Abandoned and Orphan Well Plugging 
Fund was created by statute in 2005. The fund is funded 
by an annual well fee assessed to operators or wells in the 
state. The fee generates approximately $250,000 annually. 
Prior to the establishment of the plugging fund, abandoned 
and orphan wells were plugged utilizing funds from the 
commission operating budget.
Sources of Plugging Funds
Fee Annual operating fee
Definitions
Abandoned Well
Arkansas defines an abandoned well as any well that 
is not producing, has not received regulatory approval to 
remain idle or temporarily abandoned and has an unknown 
or insolvent operator.
Temporarily Abandoned Well
A temporarily abandoned well is a well that has been 
shut-in due to well bore problems or economic reasons, but 
has not been plugged.
Blanket Bonds  
 Amount Add’l Criteria Number of Well 
Minimum $25,000 < 50
Mid $50,000 51 - 99
Maximum $100,00 > 100
Single Well Securities
 Amount Add’l Criteria Depth         
Maximum $15,000
Minimum $3,000
Statutory Authorities
Plugging Fund
Ark. Stat. Ann. § 15-71-115 (2007)
Authority to Regulate
Ark. Stat. Ann. § 15-71-110 (2007), § 15-72-217
Security or Financial Assurance 
Date Security First Required:  1983
 Modified Since 2000 Survey £
 Regulatory Authority Adjustment  R 
 Separate Site Restoration Bond £
Types of Security Bonds Allowed
CD R	
Cash R	
Certificate of Insurance £
Consolidated Financial Fund £
Escrow Account £
Financial Statements £
Letter of Credit R
Liens £ 
Security Interest £
Surety and/or Performance Bonds R
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
Regulatory Authority
Department of Conservation
801 K. Street MS 20-20
Sacramento, CA 95814
www.consrv.ca.gov/DOG
Background
California began its regulatory program in 1915, which 
included plugging and abandonment procedures. A ground 
water protection component was added in 1929. Two years 
later, the first well-bonding requirements were established. 
Revisions to update/enhance the statutes and regulations 
have occurred throughout the history of the program. The 
California Division of Oil, Gas, and Geothermal Resources 
is responsible for its maintenance.
State Plugging Efforts
California made major changes to its bonding statutes 
on Jan. 1, 1999. For individual well bonds, each amount was 
increased by $5,000. Amounts are based on depths and come 
in three increments: wells < 5,000’ = $15,000; wells > 5,000’ 
but <10,000’ = $20,000; and wells >10,000’ = $30,000. 
Blanket bonds are: $1 million “super” blanket bond covers 
all wells, including idle wells; $250,000 covers more than 50 
wells, but not idle wells; and $100,000 covers 50 or fewer 
wells, but not idle wells. 
Regarding orphan wells, the state has an innovative 
orphan well adoption program, which allows for an 
opportunity to bring wells back into production. The division 
maintains a list of orphan wells that are available for 
adoption. This program allows prospective operators to enter 
into a three-way agreement to test an orphan well for up to 
90 days without incurring any liability for plugging the well. 
If the test is successful, the prospective operator can adopt 
the well by posting a bond and becoming its permanent 
operator. If the test is unsuccessful, the prospective operator 
can walk away from the agreement with no liability incurred.
Sources of Plugging Funds
Fee Idle well fee
Tax Production assessment
Definitions
Abandoned Well
The state defines an abandoned well as one properly 
plugged, with the site location restored, and all reports filed.
Orphan Well
In California, an orphan well is defined as a well that 
has been deserted and has no viable operator or owner. 
California uses the term “idle-deserted” to define a well with 
no operator responsible for its plugging and abandonment.
California also defines an “acute orphan well” as a well that 
could pose an immediate danger to life, health, or natural 
resources, but with no viable operator responsible for 
plugging and abandoning the well.
Blanket Bonds  
 Amount Add’l Criteria Number of Well  
Minimum $100,00 < 50
Mid $250,00 > 50
Maximum $1,000,0 All wells
Single Well Securities
 Amount Add’l Criteria Depth         
Maximum $30,000 > 10,000
Mid $20,000 5,001 - 10,000
Minimum $15,000 < 5,000
Statutory Authorities
Authority to Regulate
Public Resources Code 
(PRC) 3106, 3237, 3250, 3260, and 3263]; Idle Deserted 
Wells – [PRC 3237 and 3251
Security or Financial Assurance 
Date Security First Required:  1931 
 Modified Since 2000 Survey £
 Regulatory Authority Adjustment  £ 
 Separate Site Restoration Bond £
Types of Security Bonds Allowed
CD R	
Cash R	
Certificate of Insurance £
Consolidated Financial Fund £
Escrow Account £
Financial Statements £
Letter of Credit £
Liens £ 
Security Interest £
Surety and/or Performance Bonds R
Appendix E: California
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
Regulatory Authority
Oil & Gas Conservation Commission
1120 Lincoln Street, Suite 801
Denver, CO 80203-2136
www.oil-gas.state.co.us
Background
The Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission 
(COGCC) began regulating oil and gas wells in 1951. 
Regulation of ground water protection and plugging 
and abandonment procedures also began that year. The 
commission has the authority to regulate the drilling, 
production and plugging of oil and gas related wells and all 
other operations for the production of oil or gas. COGCC 
also controls the shooting and chemical treatment of wells, 
well spacing, and all oil and gas operations to prevent and 
mitigate significant adverse environmental impacts on any 
air, water, soil or biological resources resulting from oil 
and gas operations to the extent necessary to protect public 
health, safety, and welfare; taking into consideration cost-
effectiveness and technical feasibility.
In 1989, an amendment to the Water Quality Control 
Act designated the COGCC as an implementing agency 
for ground water standards and classifications. In 1994, 
legislation required the commission to balance promotion of 
oil and gas development with the protection of public health, 
safety and welfare. This legislation also expanded the types 
of financial surety accepted. In 1995, the commission began 
requiring mechanical integrity testing on any well idle for 
more than two years.
State Plugging Efforts
Colorado’s source of plugging comes from a mill levy 
imposed on the market value of all oil and gas produced, 
saved, sold or transported from the field. The COGCC 
receives an annual appropriation of $220,000 that is 
dedicated to plugging and reclaiming orphaned wells out 
of these funds. The uncommitted balance of this fund could 
be appropriated to plug additional wells or respond to 
emergencies.
Sources of Plugging Funds
Tax Excise tax
Definitions
Abandoned Well
An abandoned well is a well that is properly abandoned 
per COGCC specifications outlined in COGCC Rule 319 a.
Orphan Well
An orphaned well is defined as a well where no operator 
can be located. An inactive well (for financial assurance 
purposes) is defined as any well from which no production 
has been sold for a period of 12 consecutive months; any 
well that has been temporarily abandoned for a period of 
six consecutive months; or any injection well which has not 
been utilized.
Temporarily Abandoned Well
A temporarily abandoned well is incapable of 
production or injection without the addition of one or more 
pieces of wellhead or other equipment, including: valves, 
tubing, rods, pumps, heater-treaters, separators, dehydrators, 
compressors, piping, or tanks.
Blanket Bonds  
 Amount Add’l Criteria Number of Well  
Minimum $30,000 < 100
Maximum $100,00 > 100
Other $25,000 Surface Blanket 
Other $5,000 Surface Irrigated land
Other $2,000 Surface Non-irrigated
Single Well Securities
 Amount Add’l Criteria Depth         
Base $5,000
Statutory Authorities
Plugging Fund
C.R.S. 34-60-122
Authority to Regulate
C.R.S. 34-60-106 (2)]; Abandonment – [Rule 319 a]
Security or Financial Assurance 
Date Security First Required:  1951 
Modified Since 2000 Survey £
 Regulatory Authority Adjustment  R 
 Separate Site Restoration Bond R
Types of Security Bonds Allowed
CD R	
Cash R	
Certificate of Insurance R
Consolidated Financial Fund R
Escrow Account R
Financial Statements R
Letter of Credit £
Liens R 
Security Interest R
Surety and/or Performance Bonds R
Appendix F: Colorado
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
Regulatory Authority
Department of Environmental Protection
903 West Tennessee Street, MS 720
Tallahassee, FL 32304-7700
www.dep.state.fl.us/geology
Background
Florida began regulation of oil and gas wells in 1945 
and has made revisions to its regulations in 1962, 1972, 
1981, 1989 and 1993. Ground water protection and plugging 
and abandonment procedures began in 1946. The Florida 
Geological Survey has responsibility for regulation of oil 
and gas wells in the state. 
State Plugging Efforts
Florida has established a Minerals Trust Fund to assist 
in plugging of abandoned wells. These funds are intended 
for use when the operator cannot or will not correct the 
violations within a reasonable time.
Definitions
Abandoned Well
An abandoned well is one that has been permanently 
plugged and forsaken.
Temporarily Abandoned Well
In Florida, temporarily abandoned wells are those with 
existing perforations plugged that could be re-entered.
Blanket Bonds  
 Amount Add’l Criteria Number of Well 
Base $1,000,0 10
Single Well Securities
Amount Add’l Criteria Depth         
Maximum  $100,000 $200,000 / > 9,000 
  producer 
Base $50,000 $100,000 / < 9,000
  producer
Statutory Authorities
Plugging Fund
Minerals Trust Fund: Florida Statutes, Chapter 376.40
Authority to Regulate
Florida Statutes, Chapter 377, Part I, Florida Administrative 
Code, Rule 62C-26.008, F.S.A. § 376.40
Security or Financial Assurance
Date Security First Required:  1946 
Modified Since 2000 Survey R
 Regulatory Authority Adjustment  R 
 Separate Site Restoration Bond £
Types of Security Bonds Allowed
CD R	
Cash R	
Certificate of Insurance £
Consolidated Financial Fund £
Escrow Account R
Financial Statements £
Letter of Credit £
Liens £ 
Security Interest £
Surety and/or Performance Bonds R
Appendix G: Florida
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case 
Regulatory Authority
Department of Natural Resources
One Natural Resources Way
Springfield, IL 67206
www.dnr.state.il.us/mines/dog
Background
The Illinois Oil and Gas Act was adopted in 1939. It 
provides the Department of Natural Resources, Division of 
Oil and Gas in the Office of Mines and Minerals with the 
authority to define and regulate idle, orphan and temporarily 
abandoned wells. While the measure generally specified 
the protection of ground water, specific surface casing 
requirements were not mandated until 1984. Plugging 
requirements, which have been modified since the adoption 
of the law, have been in place since its passage in 1939. 
No significant revision occurred until 1988, when 
authority for the regulation of oil and gas wells was removed 
from the State Mining Board and given to the director of 
the Department of Mines and Minerals (part of the Illinois 
Department of Natural Resources), effective July 1, 1995. 
In 1989, the Division of Oil and Gas was given enforcement 
authority in the form of administrative orders, including 
the issuance of civil penalties for violations. Bonding 
requirements for wells were eliminated in 1990 and replaced 
with an annual well fee, thus creating the State Plugging and 
Restoration Program. In 1997, the act was amended to create 
the Landowner Grant Program to plug abandoned wells and 
to establish salvage procedures for abandoned production 
equipment. The department uses this program to offset 
plugging costs. Over the last nine years, the oil and gas 
rules have undergone 24 amendments, including: revision of 
temporary abandonment; plugging and mechanical integrity 
testing rules for Class II wells; revision of permitting 
requirements of production wells and Class II Injection 
wells and revised rules for the operation and construction of 
production and Class II wells; rules addressing the handling, 
transportation, and disposal of exploration and production 
(E&P) waste; and the elimination of produced water pits. 
In accordance with the oil and gas rules, all idle wells 
must be reported to the department and put on temporary 
abandoned status if they have been idle for more than 
two years. Operators, which do not report idle wells to 
the department, are issued a notice of violation for failure 
to request temporary abandoned status. If the well is not 
granted temporarily abandoned status, the well is ordered 
plugged. If no operator for the well can be located, after 
notice and hearing, the unit is placed into the State Plugging 
and Restoration Program.
State Plugging Efforts
Statutes in Illinois require the department to 
annually publish a financial report describing the income, 
expenditures, and obligations of the Underground Resources 
Conservation Enforcement Fund and the Plugging and 
Restoration Fund, including the number of orphan wells 
identified and the status of closure of these wells.
In the case of orphan wells, the State of Illinois files 
a lien for all fees due and for all funds expended by the 
department to plug, replug, repair or restore the site of the 
orphan well. The lien extends to the entire owners’ and 
operators’ interest in the well and to all equipment used in 
connection with the operating of the well, as well as to the 
entire acreage included in the drilling unit or units. The lien 
created in the case of an orphan well is prior and superior 
to any mortgage or other lien except for the lien of local 
property taxes.
The department may elect to plug, replug, repair, or 
restore the well site of any orphan well, but only after a 
determination by the department, in accordance with its 
rules, that the well is orphaned. In cases where no permittee 
can be identified or located and no contributions have been 
made to the fund attributable to the operation of the well, 
expenditures are limited to amounts attributable to the fund’s 
interest earnings or from amounts in the fund other 
than permittee contributions, unless those amounts are 
otherwise restricted.
Sources of Plugging Funds
Fee Annual operating fee
Definitions
Orphan Well
Illinois defines a well as orphan if its bond has not been 
paid for the past two years, no oil or gas has been produced 
in two years, and no owner can be identified by the state. A 
well that has been drilled for purposes other than those for 
which a permit is required can also be considered an orphan 
Appendix H: Illinois
Protecting our country’s resources: the states’ case
well if it serves as a conduit for oil or salt water intrusions 
into fresh water zones or onto the surface.
Temporarily Abandoned Well
A temporarily abandoned well is a well that has been 
inactive for more than two years and has been temporarily 
abandoned in accordance with state rules.
Blanket Bonds  
 Amount Add’l Criteria Number of Well 
Minimum $25,000 < 25
Mid $50,000 26 – 50
Maximum $100,00 > 50
Single Well Securities
 Amount Add’l Criteria Depth        
Maximum $3,000  > 2,000
Base $1,500  < 2,000
Statutory Authorities
Plugging Oil and Gas Wells
Orphan Well Plugging: 225 ILCS 725/1.2; 19.5; 19.6; 19.8
Definitions
225 ILCS 725/1
Authority to Regulate
225 ILCS 725/1, 225 ILCS 725/1
Security or Financial Assurance
Date Security First Required:  1939
 Modified Since 2000 Survey £
 Regulatory Authority Adjustment  R 
 Separate Site Restoration Bond £	
Types of Security Bonds Allowed
CD R	
Cash £	
Certificate of Insurance £
Consolidated Financial Fund £
Escrow Account £
Financial Statements R
Letter of Credit £
Liens £ 
Security Interest £
Surety and/or Performance Bonds R